About Andriod :-

Andriod is a mobile operating system developed by google. It is based on a modified version of the linux kernel and other open source software and is designed primarily for touchscreen mobile devices such as smartphone and tablets.
It is developed by Google and later the OHA(Open Handset Alliance)
OHA => it is consortium of 84 companies such as Google,Samsung, AKM, synaptics, KDDI, Germin ,Teleca, Ebay, Intel etc.
It was established on 5th November 2007 led by google. It is committed to advanced open standards provides services and deploy handset using the Andriod Plateform.


The key employyes of Andriod Incorporation are Andy Rubin, Rich Miner, Chris White and Nick Sears
Originally intended for ca,era but shifted to smart phones later because of low market for camera only.
Andriod is the nick name of Andy Rubin given by the coworkers because of his love to robots.
In 2007 Google announces the development of Andriod OS
In 2008 HTC launched the first Andriod mobile.
 

Version of Andriod :-
1) Andriod 1.5 Andriod cupcake
2) Andriod 1.6 Andriod Donut
3) Andriod 2.0 Andriod Eclair
4) Andriod 2.2 Andriod Froyo
5) Andriod 2.3 Andriod Gingerbread
6) Andriod 3.0 Andriod Honeycomb
7) Andriod 4.0 Andriod Ice Cream Sandwich
8) Andriod 4.1 to 4.3.1 Andriod Jelly Bean
9) Andriod 4.4 to 4.4.4 Andriod kitKat
10) Andriod 5.0 to 5.1.1 Andriod Lollipop
11) Andriod 6.0 to 6.0.1 Andriod Marshmallow
12) Andriod 7.0 to 7.1 Andriod Nougat
13) Andriod 8.0 to 8.1 Andriod Oreo
14) Andriod 9.0 Andriod Pie


Andriod is written in Java(UI) , C (core), C++ and other

Tools needs to develop the Andriod Application:-
1) Java JDK5 or later version
2) Java Runtime Environment(JRE 6)
3) Andriod Studio


overview :-
Andriod Studio is the official IDE for Andrioc application development.
It works based on IntelliJ IDEA

Installation Andriod Studio :-
Before installing Andriod Studio make sure the machine should required installed Java JDK.


once you launched Andriod Studio . its time to mention JDK7 path or later version in andriod studio installer.


1) launched Andriod Studio.exe (make sure machine should requied installed java JDK)

2) mention JDK path or latest version in andriod studio

3) initiating JDK to Andriod Studio

4) check the component which are required to create application (selected Andriod Studio, Andriod SDK, Andriod Virtual Machine and performance intelchip)

5) specify the location of local machine path for Andriod studio and Andriod SDK

6) specify the ram space for Andriod emulator by default it would take 512 MB of local machine

7) final stage it would extract SDK

after finishing installation 

1)open andriod studio project with clicking start a new andriod studio project

2) it will ask for application name, package information and location of project

3) select minimum device your application run on 

4) select the default layout for application

after that it will open development tool
1) to test your andriod application you will need a virtual andriod device

2) to create a Andriod Virtual device Launched Andriod AVD Manager clicking AVD_Manager icon

3) now it will show the default virtual device which are present on your SDK
 or click on Create new Virtual device

 
4) to run the application click Run app or enter shift+f10

Helloworld Example=>
Before writing a hello world code you must know about XML tags . to write hello world code you should redirect to App>res>layout>Activity_main.xml

to show hello world we need to call text view with layout  (about text view and layout you must take reference at Relative Layout and Text View)


Xml stands for Extensible Markup Language. XML tags are not predefined in XML (we must define our own tags).

In Andriod we use xml for designing our layout because xml is lightweight languages so it doesn't make our layout heavy.


what is Andriod Emulator :---------------
An ANdriod Emulator is an ANdriod virtual Device(AVD) that represents a specific Andriod device. You can use an Andriod emulator as a target platform to run and test your Andriod application on your PC.
The emulator lets you prototypes , develop and test Andriod applications without using a physical device.

The Andriod SDK includes a virtual mobile device emulator that runs on your computer.The emulator lets you prototype, develop and test Andriod application without using Physical device.

=> Creating AVD
if you want to emulate a real device first create an AVD with the same device configuration as real device then launched this AVD from AVD manager.

=> Changing Orientation.
usually by default when you launched the emulator its orientation is vertical but you can change it orientation by pressing Ctrl+F11 key from the keyboarcd


Emulator Commands:-----
Apart from just orientation command there are other very useful commands of emulator that you should keep in mind while using emulator.

HOME		shifts to main screen

F2		Toggles context sensitive menu

F3 		Bring call log		

F4		End call

F5		search

F6 		Toggle trackball mode

F7		Power Button

Ctrl+F5		Ring volume up

Ctrl+F6		Ring Volume down


Emulator Sending SMS :----

You can emulate sending SMS to your emulator.
There are two ways to do that. You can do that from DDNS which can be found in ANdriod Studio, or from Telnet (Network utility found in windows).

sending SMS through Telnet.
Telnet is not enabled by default in windows. You have to enable it to use it. Once enabled you can go to command prompt and start telnet by typing telnet.

In order to send SMS , note down the AVD number which can be found on the title bar of the emulator. It could be like this 5554 e.t.c. Once noted , type this command in command prompt.telnet localhost 5554
You will see that you are now connected to your emulator. Now type this command to send message.
sms send 1234 "hello"
Once you type this command , hit enter. Now look at the AVD. You will receive a notification displaying that you got a new text message


Emulator - Making Call
You can easily make phone calls to your emulator using telent client. You need to connect to your emulator from telnet. It is discussed in the sending sms topic above.

After that you will type this command in the telent window to make a call. Its syntax is given below −

gsm call 1234
Once you type this command , hit enter. Now look at the AVD. You will receive a call from the number your put in the command.

Emulator - Transferring files
You can easily transfer files into the emulator and vice versa. In order to do that, you need to select the DDMS utility in Android studio. After that select the file explorer tab.



What are the Feature of Andriod :-------------

Andriod is a powerful operating system competing with apple 4GS and support great features. Few of them are listed below :-
1) Beautiful UI
2) Connectivity
3) Storage (SQLite a lightweight relational database is used for data storage purpose)
4) Media Support
5) Messaging
6) Web browser
7) Multi-Touch
8) Multi-Tasking

What is Widget:------------

A widget is an element of graphics of a graphical user interface(GUI) that display information or provides a specific way for a user to interact with the operating system or an application.

Andriod application are usually developed in the java language using Andriod Software Development Kit.
Once developed Andriod application can be packages easily and sold out through a stor such as Google Play Store, Amazon Play Store , Opera Mobile Store.



What is API level?

API Level is an integer value that uniquely identifies the framework API version offered by a version of the Andriod plateform.



User Interface :-
The whole concept of Android User Interface (define using View and ViewGroup) 
A view group is an individual container that organised child views.
one view group can have another view group as an child element.

viewgroup (Linear Layout) contains one Viewgroup (Relative Layout) and two View( Button and TextView) further two more view (EditText) are nested inside


Different XML files Used in Andriod :--
1) Layout XML files
it is used to define the actual UI(User Interface) of out application
It holds all the element(views) or the tools that we want to use in our application like textView Button and other UI


2) Manifest XML file (Manifest.xml)		app>manifest.xml
this xml is used to define all the components of our application.it includes the names of our application packages, our activities, recievers, services and permissions that our application need.
For Example – Suppose we need to use internet in our app then we need to define Internet permission in this file.


3) String xml File(strings.xml)		app>res>values
this xml file is used to replace the Hard-coded string with  a single string.
we define all the string in this xml file then access them in our add(Activity or in Layout XML files)

4)Style xml Files (style.xml)		app>res>values
this xml is used to define different styles and looks for the UI(User Interface) of application

5) Drawable xml files
these are those xml files that are used to provide various graphics to the elements or views of application
is we need to define a gradient color in the background of Buttom or any custom shape for a view then we create a Drawable sml file and set in the background of views.

6) color sml file(colors.xml)
this files are used to define color codes that we used in our app.



Andriod Architecture :-

Andriod operating system is a stack of software component which is roughly divided into five sections and four main layers.

layer1 Linux Kernal

At the bottom of the layers in Linux- Linux 3.6 
this provides a level of abstraction between the device hardware and it contains all the essential hardware drivers like cameras, keyboard, display
the kernal handles all the things that linux is really good at such as networking and a vast array of device drivers which take the pain out of interfacing to perifheral hardware.

layer 2 Libraries

On top of Linux kernel there is a set of libraries including open-source Web browser engine WebKit, well known library libc, SQLite database which is a useful repository for storage and sharing of application data, libraries to play and record audio and video, SSL libraries responsible for Internet security etc.

=> Android Runtime

In Andriod Runtime , there are core libraries and DVM(Dalvik Virtual Machine) which is responsible to run andriod application.
DVM is like JVM it is optimized for mobile device.
It consume less memory and provides fast performance.
 

layer 3 Application Framework

appplication framework layer provides many higher-level services to application in the form of java classes.
Andriod framwork includes the following :-

Activity Manager − Controls all aspects of the application lifecycle and activity stack.

Content Providers − Allows applications to publish and share data with other applications.

Resource Manager − Provides access to non-code embedded resources such as strings, color settings and user interface layouts.

Notifications Manager − Allows applications to display alerts and notifications to the user.

View System − An extensible set of views used to create application user interfaces.


layer 4 Applications
You will find all the Android application at the top layer. You will write your application to be installed on this layer only. Examples of such applications are Contacts Books, Browser, Games etc.




Andriod Application Components:-

Application components are the essential building blocks of an Android application. These components are loosely coupled by the application manifest file AndroidManifest.xml that describes each component of the application and how they interact.


There are following four main components that can be used within Andriod application

1)Activities
They dictate the UI and Handle the User interaction to the smart phone screen 
An activity represent a single screen with a user interface in-short Activity performs actions on the screen.

View => A view is the ui element such as button label text field etc Anything that you see is a view.

Intent => Intent is a message object you can use to request an action from another app component.

2)Services
they handle background processing associated with an application
Servive is background process that can run for a long time.

There are two types of services local and Remote

Local => local service is accessed from within the application

Remote => remote service is accessed remotly from other application running on the same device.

3)Broadcast Receivers
they handle communication between Andriod OS and applications.
=>For example, applications can also initiate broadcasts to let other applications know that some data has been downloaded to the device and is available for them to use, so this is broadcast receiver who will intercept this communication and will initiate appropriate action.


4) Content Providers
Content Provides are used to share data between the applications.
they handle data and database management issues
a content provider component supplies data from one application to other on request.



Additional Components 
1) Fragment
Fragment are like parts of activiy. An activity can display one or more fragments on the screen at the same time.
represent a portion of user interface in an activity

2)view
ui interface that are drawn on-screen including buttonslists forms

3) layout
view hierarchies that controls screen format and appearance of the views

4)Intents
Messages writing component together

5) Resources 
external elements such as string constants and drawable pictures

6) Manifest
configuration file for the application
It contains information about activities content provides permission etc. It is like the web.xml file Java EE.



=> Before you run your app you should be aware of a few directories and files in the Andriod project-

1) Java
This contains the .java source files for your project. By default, it includes an MainActivity.java source file having an activity class that runs when your app is launched using the app icon.
This is the actual application file which ultimately gets converted to a Dalvik executable and runs the application.



2) res/drawable-hdpi

This is a directory for drawable objects that are designed for high-density screens.

3) res/layout

This is a directory for files that define your app's user interface.

4) res/values

This is a directory for other various XML files that contain a collection of resources, such as strings and colours definitions

5) AndroidManifest.xml

This is the manifest file which describes the fundamental characteristics of the app and defines each of its components

Whatever component you develop as a part of your application, you must declare all its components in a manifest.xml which resides at the root of the application project directory. This file works as an interface between Android OS and your application


Following is the list of tags which you will use in your manifest file to specify different Android application components −

<activity>elements for activities

<service> elements for services

<receiver> elements for broadcast receivers

<provider> elements for content providers

4) value
The strings.xml file is located in the res/values folder and it contains all the text that your application uses. For example, the names of buttons, labels, default text, and similar types of strings go into this file. This file is responsible for their textual content.

<resources>
   <string name="app_name">HelloWorld</string>
   <string name="hello_world">Hello world!</string>
   <string name="menu_settings">Settings</string>
   <string name="title_activity_main">MainActivity</string>
</resources>


5) The Layout File
The activity_main.xml is a layout file available in res/layout directory, that is referenced by your application when building its interface. You will modify this file very frequently to change the layout of your application. For your "Hello World!" application, this file will have following content related to default layout 


6) Build.gradle

This is an auto generated file which contains compileSdkVersion, buildToolsVersion, applicationId, minSdkVersion, targetSdkVersion, versionCode and versionName





Accessing Resources Organizing & Accessing :-

Apart from coding for the application you take care of various other resources like static content that your code uses such as bitmaps,colors , layout definitions, user interface string, snimation instructions and more. These resources are always maintained separately in various sub-directoris under res/ directory of the project.


Directory & Resource Type :-

1) anim/
XML file that define property animations. They are saved in res/anim folder and accessed from the R.anim class.

2) color/
XML files that define a state list of colors.

3) drawable/
Image files like .png, .jpg, .gif or XML files that are compiled into bitmaps, state lists, shapes, animation drawable. They are saved in res/drawable/ and accessed from the R.drawable class.

4) layout/

XML files that define a user interface layout. They are saved in res/layout/ and accessed from the R.layout class.

5) menu/

XML files that define application menus, such as an Options Menu, Context Menu, or Sub Menu. They are saved in res/menu/ and accessed from the R.menu class.

6) raw/

Arbitrary files to save in their raw form. You need to call Resources.openRawResource() with the resource ID, which is R.raw.filename to open such raw files.

7) values/

XML files that contain simple values, such as strings, integers, and colors. For example, here are some filename conventions for resources you can create in this directory −

arrays.xml for resource arrays, and accessed from the R.array class.

integers.xml for resource integers, and accessed from the R.integer class.

bools.xml for resource boolean, and accessed from the R.bool class.

colors.xml for color values, and accessed from the R.color class.

dimens.xml for dimension values, and accessed from the R.dimen class.

strings.xml for string values, and accessed from the R.string class.

styles.xml for styles, and accessed from the R.style class.




Accessing Resources :-----
During your application development you will need to access defined resources either in your code, or in your layout XML files.

1) Accessing Resources in Code

When your Android application is compiled, a R class gets generated, which contains resource IDs for all the resources available in your res/ directory. You can use R class to access that resource using sub-directory and resource name or directly resource ID.

To access res/drawable/myimage.png and set an ImageView you will use following code −

ImageView imageView = (ImageView) findViewById(R.id.myimageview);
imageView.setImageResource(R.drawable.myimage);
Here first line of the code make use of R.id.myimageview to get ImageView defined with id myimageview in a Layout file. Second line of code makes use of R.drawable.myimage to get an image with name myimage available in drawable sub-directory under /res.


2) Accessing Resource in xml file
Consider the following resource XML res/values/strings.xml file that includes a color resource and a string resource −

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<resources>
   <color name="opaque_red">#f00</color>
   <string name="hello">Hello!</string>
</resources>
Now you can use these resources in the following layout file to set the text color and text string as follows −

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<EditText xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
   android:layout_width="fill_parent"
   android:layout_height="fill_parent"
   android:textColor="@color/opaque_red"
   android:text="@string/hello" />




Android - Activities 

Android system initiates its program with in an Activity starting with a call on onCreate() callback method. There is a sequence of callback methods that start up an activity and a sequence of callback methods that tear down an activity as shown in the below Activity life cycle diagram.



callback and description :-

1) onCreate()

This is the first callback and called when the activity is first created.

2) onStart()

This callback is called when the activity becomes visible to the user.

3) onResume()

This is called when the user starts interacting with the application.

4) onPause()

The paused activity does not receive user input and cannot execute any code and called when the current activity is being paused and the previous activity is being resumed.

5) onStop()

This callback is called when the activity is no longer visible.

6) onDestroy()

This callback is called before the activity is destroyed by the system.

7) onRestart()

This callback is called when the activity restarts after stopping it.

Example=>
This file includes each of the fundamental life cycle methods. The Log.d() method has been used to generate log messages −

package com.example.helloworld;

import android.os.Bundle;
import android.app.Activity;
import android.util.Log;

public class MainActivity extends Activity {
   String msg = "Android : ";
   
   /** Called when the activity is first created. */
   @Override
   public void onCreate(Bundle savedInstanceState) {
      super.onCreate(savedInstanceState);
      setContentView(R.layout.activity_main);
      Log.d(msg, "The onCreate() event");
   }

   /** Called when the activity is about to become visible. */
   @Override
   protected void onStart() {
      super.onStart();
      Log.d(msg, "The onStart() event");
   }

   /** Called when the activity has become visible. */
   @Override
   protected void onResume() {
      super.onResume();
      Log.d(msg, "The onResume() event");
   }

   /** Called when another activity is taking focus. */

   @Override
   protected void onPause() {
      super.onPause();
      Log.d(msg, "The onPause() event");
   }

   /** Called when the activity is no longer visible. */
   @Override
   protected void onStop() {
      super.onStop();
      Log.d(msg, "The onStop() event");
   }

   /** Called just before the activity is destroyed. */
   @Override
   public void onDestroy() {
      super.onDestroy();
      Log.d(msg, "The onDestroy() event");
   }
}







Android - Services :-----

A service is a component that runs in the background to perform long-running operations without needing to interact with the user and it works even if application is destroyed. A service can essentially take two states

1) Started

A service is started when an application component, such as an activity, starts it by calling startService(). Once started, a service can run in the background indefinitely, even if the component that started it is destroyed.


2) Bound

A service is bound when an application component binds to it by calling bindService(). A bound service offers a client-server interface that allows components to interact with the service, send requests, get results, and even do so across processes with interprocess communication (IPC)



The following diagram on the left shows the life cycle when the service is created with startService() and the diagram on the right shows the life cycle when the service is created with bindService():


Callback & Description :--
1) onStartCommand()

The system calls this method when another component, such as an activity, requests that the service be started, by calling startService(). If you implement this method, it is your responsibility to stop the service when its work is done, by calling stopSelf() or stopService() methods.

2) onBind()

The system calls this method when another component wants to bind with the service by calling bindService(). If you implement this method, you must provide an interface that clients use to communicate with the service, by returning an IBinder object. You must always implement this method, but if you don't want to allow binding, then you should return null

3) onUnbind()

The system calls this method when all clients have disconnected from a particular interface published by the service.

4) onRebind()

The system calls this method when new clients have connected to the service, after it had previously been notified that all had disconnected in its onUnbind(Intent).

5) onCreate()

The system calls this method when the service is first created using onStartCommand() or onBind(). This call is required to perform one-time set-up.

6) onDestroy()

The system calls this method when the service is no longer used and is being destroyed. Your service should implement this to clean up any resources such as threads, registered listeners, receivers, etc.

